docs/developers.md, before:

# Documentation for py_cui Developers

This page contains information on writing new widgets and popups, as well as anything else required for developers and contributors for py_cui.

### Developer tools

There are several tools provided to `py_cui` developers to aid with debugging. Frst and formost is logging, which can be enabled with:

```
root.enable_logging()
```
To add log messages, you will need a logger object, which for most classes is passed from the root `PyCUI` instance. Once you have a logger, you can make it write messages with:

```
logger.debug()
logger.warn()
logger.error()
```

as is the case with the built in `logging` module. 

In addition, there are several shell/batch scripts included for auto-generating documentation from docstrings. Developers should run an appropriate script after completing a new feature with docstrings to ensure resulting markdown looks correct:

```
cd docs/scripts
bash generateFromDocstrings.sh
```

for Linux/Mac users, and

```
cd docs\scripts
generateFromDocstrings.bat
```

for windows users. 

In the event that a new module was added with the changes, please add its generated markdown file to the `mkdocs.yml` configuration file in the root of this directory. For example, for the `grid.py` module, the autogenerated docs are added as follows:

```
- Grid: DocstringGenerated/Grid.md
```

### Unit Tests

`py_cui` unit tests are written for `pytest`. Make sure `pytest` is installed, and simply run
```
pytest
```
in the root directory to run all unit tests.

### Adding a new Widget

We will walk through the steps of adding a new widget to py_cui (in this case a scroll menu) in order to demonstrate this process.

**Step One - Write an implementation**

To begin, we need to consider what we will need for our widget to do. For this, we will add a subclass to `UIImplementation`. We will add this subclass to `py_cui/ui.py`. In our case, for a scroll menu, we need to be able to scroll up and down, and we will need some variables to represent the current items, the selected item, and the viewport. We will also add some basic getter and setters for these variables.

Below is the `MenuImplementation` class. note that it takes a logger object instance as a parameter that it passes to its `UIImplementation` superclass.

```python
class MenuImplementation(UIImplementation):

    def __init__(self, logger):
        super().__init__(logger)
        self._top_view         = 0
        self._selected_item    = 0
        self._view_items       = []

    def clear(self):
        self._view_items = []
        self._selected_item = 0
        self._top_view = 0
        self._logger.debug('Clearing menu')

    def get_selected_item(self):
        return self._selected_item

    def set_selected_item(self, selected_item):
        self._selected_item = selected_item

    def _scroll_up(self):
        if self._top_view > 0 and self._selected_item == self._top_view:
            self._top_view = self._top_view - 1
        if self._selected_item > 0:
            self._selected_item = self._selected_item - 1

        self._logger.debug(f'Scrolling up to item {self._selected_item}')

    def _scroll_down(self, viewport_height):
        if self._selected_item < len(self._view_items) - 1:
            self._selected_item = self._selected_item + 1
        if self._selected_item > self._top_view + viewport_height:
            self._top_view = self._top_view + 1

        self._logger.debug(f'Scrolling down to item {self._selected_item}')

    def add_item(self, item_text):
        self._logger.debug(f'Adding item {item_text} to menu')
        self._view_items.append(item_text)


    def add_item_list(self, item_list):
        self._logger.debug(f'Adding item list {str(item_list)} to menu')
        for item in item_list:
            self.add_item(item)

    def remove_selected_item(self):
        if len(self._view_items) == 0:
            return
        self._logger.debug(f'Removing {self._view_items[self._selected_item]}')
        del self._view_items[self._selected_item]
        if self._selected_item >= len(self._view_items):
            self._selected_item = self._selected_item - 1

    def get_item_list(self):
        return self._view_items

    def get(self):
        if len(self._view_items) > 0:
            return self._view_items[self._selected_item]
        return None
```

The reason we separate any widget ui-agnostic logic into a seperate class is because we want to reuse this logic if we wish to create other UI elements that share similar characteristics but are not widgets (ex. popups).

**Step Two - Extend the Widget Class**

Your next step when writing a new widget is to create a class in `py_cui/widgets.py` that extends the base `Widget` class, as well as the implementation class we just constructed. We call the superclass initializers, and we add override functions for `_draw` and `_handle_key_press`.

For our `ScrollMenu` example:

```Python
class ScrollMenu(Widget, py_cui.ui.MenuImplementation):

    def __init__(self, id, title, grid, row, column, row_span, column_span, padx, pady, logger):
        Widget.__init__(self, id, title, grid, row, column, row_span, column_span, padx, pady, logger)
        py_cui.ui.MenuImplementation.__init__(self, logger)

    def _handle_key_press(self, key_pressed):

        super().handle_key_press(key_pressed)

    def _draw(self):

        super().draw()
```
The `_handle_key_press` and `_draw` functions must be extended for your new widget. You may leave the `_handle_key_press` as above, if you don't require any keybindings for the widget. The `_draw` function must extended, as the base class does no drawing itself, instead just setting up color rules.

**Step 3 - Add Key Bindings**

Next, add any default key bindings you wish to have for the widget when in focus mode. In the case of the scroll menu, we wish for the arrow keys to scroll up and down, so we extend the `handle_key_press` function:
```Python
def _handle_key_press(self, key_pressed):

    super().handle_key_press(key_pressed)
    if key_pressed == py_cui.keys.KEY_UP_ARROW:
        self.scroll_up()
    if key_pressed == py_cui.keys.KEY_DOWN_ARROW:
        self.scroll_down()
```
Note that the way default key bindings are added are simply `if` statements, which happen after the `super()` call. The `_scroll_up()` and `_scroll_down()` functions simply contain the logic for editing the viewport for the menu, and should have been implemented in the `MenuImplementation` superclass.

**Step 4 - implement the Draw function**

In the draw function, you must use the `self._renderer` object to render your widget to the screen. In our case, we want a border around the menu widget, and we also want to draw menu items that are within our viewport. The key renderer functions we will use are:
```Python
self._renderer.draw_border(self)
```
which will draw a border around the widget space, and 
```Python
self._renderer.draw_text(self, text, y_position)
```
which will draw the text in the y_position. For our scroll menu, we would write the following:
```Python
def _draw(self):

    super()._draw()
    self._renderer.set_color_mode(self._color)
    self._renderer.draw_border(self)
    counter = self._pady + 1
    line_counter = 0
    for line in self._view_items:
        if line_counter < self._top_view:
            line_counter = line_counter + 1
        else:
            if counter >= self._height - self._pady - 1:
                break
            if line_counter == self._selected_item:
                self._renderer.draw_text(self, line, self._start_y + counter, selected=True)
            else:
                self._renderer.draw_text(self, line, self._start_y + counter)
            counter = counter + 1
            line_counter = line_counter + 1
    self._renderer.unset_color_mode(self._color)
    self._renderer.reset_cursor(self)
```

Note that you should call `super()._draw()` and `self._renderer.set_color_mode(self._color)` at the start of the function (to initialize color modes), and `self._renderer.unset_color_mode(self._color)` and `self._renderer.reset_cursor(self)` to remove color settings, and place the cursor in the correct location.

**Step 5 - Add a function to `PyCUI` class to add the widget**

Finally, add a function to the `PyCUI` class in `__init__.py` that will add the widget to the CUI. In our case we write the following:
```Python
def add_scroll_menu(self, title, row, column, row_span = 1, column_span = 1, padx = 1, pady = 0):

    id = f'Widget{len(self.get_widgets().keys())}'
    new_scroll_menu = widgets.ScrollMenu(   id, 
                                            title, 
                                            self._grid, 
                                            row, 
                                            column, 
                                            row_span, 
                                            column_span, 
                                            padx, 
                                            pady, 
                                            self._logger)
    self.get_widgets()[id] = new_scroll_menu
    if self._selected_widget is None:
        self.set_selected_widget(id)
    self._logger.debug(f'Adding widget {title} w/ ID {id} of type {str(type(new_scroll_menu))}'
    return new_scroll_menu
```
The function must:

* Create an id titled 'Widget####' where #### is replaced with the number of widget
* Add the widget to the PyCUI widgets dict with the ID as a key
* If there is no selected widget, make this new widget the selected one
* Return a reference to the widget

**That's it!**

Your widget is now ready to be added to the CUI! Simply call the add function with appropriate parameters on the root `PyCUI` window:

```Python
root.add_scroll_menu('Demo', 1, 1)
```

### Adding a new Popup

This documentation section is incomplete. Feel free to [expand me](https://github.com/jwlodek/py_cui/pulls).

### Working on the renderer

This documentation section is incomplete. Feel free to [expand me](https://github.com/jwlodek/py_cui/pulls).

### Working on color rules

This documentation section is incomplete. Feel free to [expand me](https://github.com/jwlodek/py_cui/pulls).

Commit message:

Update adding widget docs with add_custom_widget function

docs/developers.md, after:

# Documentation for py_cui Developers

This page contains information on writing new widgets and popups, as well as anything else required for developers and contributors for py_cui.

### Developer tools

There are several tools provided to `py_cui` developers to aid with debugging. Frst and formost is logging, which can be enabled with:

```
root.enable_logging()
```
To add log messages, you will need a logger object, which for most classes is passed from the root `PyCUI` instance. Once you have a logger, you can make it write messages with:

```
logger.debug()
logger.warn()
logger.error()
```

as is the case with the built in `logging` module. 

In addition, there are several shell/batch scripts included for auto-generating documentation from docstrings. Developers should run an appropriate script after completing a new feature with docstrings to ensure resulting markdown looks correct:

```
cd docs/scripts
bash generateFromDocstrings.sh
```

for Linux/Mac users, and

```
cd docs\scripts
generateFromDocstrings.bat
```

for windows users. 

In the event that a new module was added with the changes, please add its generated markdown file to the `mkdocs.yml` configuration file in the root of this directory. For example, for the `grid.py` module, the autogenerated docs are added as follows:

```
- Grid: DocstringGenerated/Grid.md
```

### Unit Tests

`py_cui` unit tests are written for `pytest`. Make sure `pytest` is installed, and simply run
```
pytest
```
in the root directory to run all unit tests.

### Adding a new Widget

We will walk through the steps of adding a new widget to py_cui (in this case a scroll menu) in order to demonstrate this process.

**Step One - Write an implementation**

To begin, we need to consider what we will need for our widget to do. For this, we will add a subclass to `UIImplementation`. We will add this subclass to `py_cui/ui.py`. In our case, for a scroll menu, we need to be able to scroll up and down, and we will need some variables to represent the current items, the selected item, and the viewport. We will also add some basic getter and setters for these variables.

Below is the `MenuImplementation` class. note that it takes a logger object instance as a parameter that it passes to its `UIImplementation` superclass.

```python
class MenuImplementation(UIImplementation):

    def __init__(self, logger):
        super().__init__(logger)
        self._top_view         = 0
        self._selected_item    = 0
        self._view_items       = []

    def clear(self):
        self._view_items = []
        self._selected_item = 0
        self._top_view = 0
        self._logger.debug('Clearing menu')

    def get_selected_item(self):
        return self._selected_item

    def set_selected_item(self, selected_item):
        self._selected_item = selected_item

    def _scroll_up(self):
        if self._top_view > 0 and self._selected_item == self._top_view:
            self._top_view = self._top_view - 1
        if self._selected_item > 0:
            self._selected_item = self._selected_item - 1

        self._logger.debug(f'Scrolling up to item {self._selected_item}')

    def _scroll_down(self, viewport_height):
        if self._selected_item < len(self._view_items) - 1:
            self._selected_item = self._selected_item + 1
        if self._selected_item > self._top_view + viewport_height:
            self._top_view = self._top_view + 1

        self._logger.debug(f'Scrolling down to item {self._selected_item}')

    def add_item(self, item_text):
        self._logger.debug(f'Adding item {item_text} to menu')
        self._view_items.append(item_text)


    def add_item_list(self, item_list):
        self._logger.debug(f'Adding item list {str(item_list)} to menu')
        for item in item_list:
            self.add_item(item)

    def remove_selected_item(self):
        if len(self._view_items) == 0:
            return
        self._logger.debug(f'Removing {self._view_items[self._selected_item]}')
        del self._view_items[self._selected_item]
        if self._selected_item >= len(self._view_items):
            self._selected_item = self._selected_item - 1

    def get_item_list(self):
        return self._view_items

    def get(self):
        if len(self._view_items) > 0:
            return self._view_items[self._selected_item]
        return None
```

The reason we separate any widget ui-agnostic logic into a seperate class is because we want to reuse this logic if we wish to create other UI elements that share similar characteristics but are not widgets (ex. popups).

**Step Two - Extend the Widget Class**

Your next step when writing a new widget is to create a class in `py_cui/widgets.py` that extends the base `Widget` class, as well as the implementation class we just constructed. We call the superclass initializers, and we add override functions for `_draw` and `_handle_key_press`.

For our `ScrollMenu` example:

```Python
class ScrollMenu(Widget, py_cui.ui.MenuImplementation):

    def __init__(self, id, title, grid, row, column, row_span, column_span, padx, pady, logger):
        Widget.__init__(self, id, title, grid, row, column, row_span, column_span, padx, pady, logger)
        py_cui.ui.MenuImplementation.__init__(self, logger)

    def _handle_key_press(self, key_pressed):

        super().handle_key_press(key_pressed)

    def _draw(self):

        super().draw()
```

The `_handle_key_press` and `_draw` functions must be extended for your new widget. You may leave the `_handle_key_press` as above, if you don't require any keybindings for the widget. The `_draw` function must extended, as the base class does no drawing itself, instead just setting up color rules.

In addition, any widget class you develop must have the arguments `(self, id, title, grid, row, column, row_span, column_span, padx, pady, logger)` in it's initializer, in that order, so that the `add_custom_widget` function will  work. Additional arguments or keyword arguments can follow these.

**Step 3 - Add Key Bindings**

Next, add any default key bindings you wish to have for the widget when in focus mode. In the case of the scroll menu, we wish for the arrow keys to scroll up and down, so we extend the `handle_key_press` function:
```Python
def _handle_key_press(self, key_pressed):

    super().handle_key_press(key_pressed)
    if key_pressed == py_cui.keys.KEY_UP_ARROW:
        self.scroll_up()
    if key_pressed == py_cui.keys.KEY_DOWN_ARROW:
        self.scroll_down()
```
Note that the way default key bindings are added are simply `if` statements, which happen after the `super()` call. The `_scroll_up()` and `_scroll_down()` functions simply contain the logic for editing the viewport for the menu, and should have been implemented in the `MenuImplementation` superclass.

**Step 4 - implement the Draw function**

In the draw function, you must use the `self._renderer` object to render your widget to the screen. In our case, we want a border around the menu widget, and we also want to draw menu items that are within our viewport. The key renderer functions we will use are:
```Python
self._renderer.draw_border(self)
```
which will draw a border around the widget space, and 
```Python
self._renderer.draw_text(self, text, y_position)
```
which will draw the text in the y_position. For our scroll menu, we would write the following:
```Python
def _draw(self):

    super()._draw()
    self._renderer.set_color_mode(self._color)
    self._renderer.draw_border(self)
    counter = self._pady + 1
    line_counter = 0
    for line in self._view_items:
        if line_counter < self._top_view:
            line_counter = line_counter + 1
        else:
            if counter >= self._height - self._pady - 1:
                break
            if line_counter == self._selected_item:
                self._renderer.draw_text(self, line, self._start_y + counter, selected=True)
            else:
                self._renderer.draw_text(self, line, self._start_y + counter)
            counter = counter + 1
            line_counter = line_counter + 1
    self._renderer.unset_color_mode(self._color)
    self._renderer.reset_cursor(self)
```

Note that you should call `super()._draw()` and `self._renderer.set_color_mode(self._color)` at the start of the function (to initialize color modes), and `self._renderer.unset_color_mode(self._color)` and `self._renderer.reset_cursor(self)` to remove color settings, and place the cursor in the correct location.

**Step 5 - Use the add_custom_widget function to add your widget to your TUI**

Finally, you are ready to add an instance of your widget to the TUI. To do this, use the `add_custom_widget` function. See the below example adding our above widget. Optionally, you may want to add a conveniance function specifically meant to add instances of your widget to the TUI. In our example it would be `add_scroll_menu`, which can be found in `py_cui/__init__.py`.

```Python
# add_custom_widget(Widget class, title, row, column, rowspan, colspan, padx, pady)
my_widget = root.add_custom_widget(py_cui.widgets.ScrollMenu, "My Title", 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1)
```

Note the `add_custom_widget` function signature expects your class that extends `Widget` as the first argument, followed by critical widget information. You can also add additional `*args` and `**kwargs` to the funtion call. The function will return an instance of the initial class with all the remaining arguments passed in in order.

**That's it!**

Your widget should now be added to the CUI!

### Adding a new Popup

This documentation section is incomplete. Feel free to [expand me](https://github.com/jwlodek/py_cui/pulls).

### Working on the renderer

This documentation section is incomplete. Feel free to [expand me](https://github.com/jwlodek/py_cui/pulls).

### Working on color rules

This documentation section is incomplete. Feel free to [expand me](https://github.com/jwlodek/py_cui/pulls).
